5. How could you find a slow subscriber to a process? Is there protection needed against this, or 
is it safe for the server process?

A slow subscriber is a client that cannot process incoming messages as fast as the 
server sends them, messages queue up in the server's output. This can cause the server to crash
or just general system slow down

In order to find slow subscribers you could call .z.W, this will show a dictionary of
each handle and its output queue size. You could check the handle of the large subscriber
to identify which process it is.

There is protection needed against this, it is not safe for the server process for a number
of reasons. Queued messages consume server RAM and can cause memory exhaustation, in turn leading
to the server running out of memory and killing the process. Additionally, if there are 
synchronous requests, these may wait forever if there are slow processes. One slow client affects
all clients.

Protection against this could come in the form of using async messages if possible or setting
timeouts for sync calls to stop the process if it is taking too long.

6. What happens if you open a connection from a client to kdb server while the server is busy? Is 
there anything you can do about this

Given kdb+ is single threaded if the server is busy, new connections must wait until the server
finishes its current task, the hopen will be blocked/hangning waiting to be let in.
The connection might timeout if it is in limbo for too long.

There are ways round this, for the client side setting timeouts ie server busy try again later function
that times out after 5 seconds. Also on the server side you could use deferred response to get around this.
Also as mentioned before given kdb+ is single threaded you could use secondary threads to get around this.

7. I want to set up a gateway process that can send an incoming query onto multiple HDBs, and 
then serve other queries while it waits for all the HDBs to respond. What is this behavior known as? 
What function in the .z namespace needs overwritten for this to happen

This behavior is known as Deferred Response. To implement it, you must override the 
.z.pg function (synchronous message handler) in the .z namespace. The key mechanism is using -30!(::) inside 
.z.pg which tells KDB+ "don't send a response now - I'll send it later", allowing the gateway to return immediately 
and handle other incoming queries instead of blocking. When the gateway receives a query from a client, it stores the client handle, 
fans out the query to multiple HDBs asynchronously using neg[h], and returns -30!(::) to defer the response. As HDB responses come back (handled in .z.ps), 
the gateway collects them, and once all HDBs have responded, it sends the combined result back to the original client using -30!(clientHandle; result). 
This pattern enables a single-threaded gateway to efficiently serve many clients concurrently without blocking on slow backend queries.

8. I have connected to a server process and can run most commands fine, e.g. h”1+1”
What could be the reason I get below error when I run the following?
q) h: hopen `:host:port:username:password
q) h “system \”ls ../ \””
 ‘access

 Initially, I thought this access error would be due to having incorrect credentials for login but if you are already
 connected to the server this must not be the case. The reason I believe is that the server may have been started
 with user based restrictions which blocks system commands for remote clients for security reasons. This is because there is a -u flag
 which means that normal q expressions like h"1+1" work fine over IPC, the -u flag specifically prevents remote clients from executing system 
 calls such as system "ls", system "rm", or any other shell commands. This is a security measure because allowing remote users to execute system commands could be dangerous 

 9. I have opened a handle to another process and try to look at a variable defined on that 
process, variableX. What could cause the below error?
q) h: hopen `:host:port:username:password
q) h “variableX”
 ‘limit

 The 'limit error occurs because variableX is too large to transfer over IPC - the data exceeds the workspace memory limit set by the -w flag on the server,
  or exceeds the maximum serialization size for IPC transfer.

10. What are the differences, pros and cons of sync, async and deferred sync messaging?

Synchronous messaging is the approach where the client sends a query and blocks waiting for the response, 
and the server also blocks while processing - this is easy to use with direct return values and simple error handling, but both client and server are frozen until completion, making it unsuitable for high-throughput systems.
Asynchronous messaging  allows the client to send a query and continue immediately without waiting for a response, and the server processes without blocking - this enables high throughput and fire-and-forget patterns, but there's no direct return value, responses must be handled via callbacks, and error handling is more complex. 
Deferred synchronous messaging combines the best of both: the client uses normal sync syntax and blocks waiting for a response, but the server uses -30!(::) to defer the response and continue handling other queries, then later sends the result with -30!(clientHandle; result) - this is ideal for gateway processes that fan out queries to multiple backends,
as the client code stays simple while the server remains non-blocking, though it requires more complex server-side state management to track pending requests and client handles.